No matter how large or small your company, effective team collaboration is an essential part of its success. And that goes double for remote teams, who need to maintain a close connection with colleagues outside of the physical workspace.

The traditional definition of “collaboration” describes the action of working with someone to produce or achieve something—and in business terms, that “something” could be a particular project or the overall goals of the company.

Thanks to the rise of computer technology, collaboration has often come to involve an interaction between corporate culture and technology, using digital team collaboration tools to unite team members from different locations.

Collaboration in the workplace emphasizes teamwork, creative thinking, and equal participation to achieve a common goal such as completing a project on time. Some of the key elements include:

Communication
Transparency
Accountability
Engagement
Compromise
Diversity
Share files

Sharing files (Google Docs, PDFs, JPGs, etc.) is essential to collaborating and creating one ”source of truth“ where teams can find the information they need. You should also be able to discuss shared files to keep details about assets in one place.

Schedule projects and tasks

The ability to assign and reassign tasks helps individuals understand priorities, while calendars and other scheduling features allow teams to collaborate around plans and stay up to date on progress and changes.

Coordinate work

You need to see tasks, dependencies, and milestones to determine due dates, adjust plans when needed, and help your team work efficiently. Good collaboration tools keep an eye on progress and alert you when deadlines approach or work falls behind.

Communicate seamlessly

Keeping discussions about projects and to-do lists in one place helps teams turn ideas and feedback into action. The solution you choose should also integrate with your messaging and email apps to support the different ways your team likes to communicate.

Team chat
The best collaboration team apps have a built-in messaging system for sharing files and notes as well as conversations.

The more messages you send, the more space you’ll need—so it’s best to choose an app that allows plenty of space for a saved message history. Look out for security features to keep important conversations safe, and extra communication ideas like @mentions, emojis, GIFs, and memes.

Task management
Task management is a big part of team collaboration, as everyone needs to play their part in meeting the team’s goals.

Task management software helps you streamline workflows, track tasks, and deliver projects on time. If it incorporates other collaboration tools, that’s even better, as it helps the team’s managers maintain an overview of the whole project.

Apps offering built-in task management should enable you to:

Create, assign, and manage tasks
Set due dates
Upload attachments
Send and receive messages
Automate recurring tasks